This document contains guidelines for translating dpScreenOCR.

Weblate
=======

dpScreenOCR is translated on Weblate:

https://hosted.weblate.org/engage/dpscreenocr/

This page also has a link to the Weblate documentation with detailed
instructions on how to use the service.

The dpScreenOCR project on Weblate has two translation components:
"dpScreenOCR" (translation of the program interface) and "dpScreenOCR
Website". Both components have the same set of target languages. To
request a new language, select "Start new translation" (the plus sign
at the top of any component's language list), but please only do this
if you intend to do at least part of the translation.


Text templates
==============

No matter what component you are translating, sometimes you will see
that parts of the text are enclosed in braces, such as:

    Hello, {name}!

These are templates that will be replaced with real text and therefore
should not be translated. If you need to insert a brace as is (i.e.,
so that it appears in the final text and does not trigger a template
substitution), type it twice, like:

    Here is a left brace: {{.


Translating the user interface
==============================

Some OCR language names use an inverted form, such as "French, Middle"
instead of "Middle French". This allows related languages ("French"
and "French, Middle") to be next to each other when the language list
is sorted by name. If possible, use the same convention when
translating to your language.


Translating the website
=======================


HTML
----

Almost all strings from the website use HTML formatting, so sometimes
you will see the tags like <b>, <a ...>, etc. Please read an overview
of HTML markup on Wikipedia if you have never encountered HTML before:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HTML#Markup


Spaces and dashes of various widths
-----------------------------------

If you need to insert a non-ASCII space or dash, please use character
references, like "&ndash;" for an en dash or "&thinsp;" for a thin
space. Otherwise, it will be nearly impossible for other people to
visually distinguish such a symbol from its counterparts of different
widths.


Links
-----

Most of links use templates right inside the <a> tag so that you don't
have to copy the URL (href=...) from the source string. However, if a
link includes a URL, it means that the URL may have a localized
version (such as a URL to a Wikipedia page), and you are encouraged to
use one if available.
